README.adoc, before:

= Kubernetes Simple Database Provisioner
:toc:

[link=http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0.txt]
image::.images/license-apache.svg[License: Apache License 2.0]

image::.images/simple-database-provisioner.svg[alt=Simple Database Provisioner,width=200]



The simple database provisioner allows to create and remove databases and user credentials (secretes) via
kubernetes ressources on an existing DBMS server.

It was created as a simpler and more resilient alternative to setting up databases with OSBA.

== Status

**CURRENT STATUS: ALPHA**

Not intended for production use yet. Tests, refactoring
and updating the documentation are missing.


== Concept

* DBMS servers have to be created by some other tool (e.g. manually, or terraform)
* DBMS servers are identified in the config via a unique name and a secret with
  the connection information
* DBMS management is (currently) static and requires a pod restart
* Database Instance and Binding management is dynamic via two Custom Resource Definitions

== Installation

There is a helm chart provided so you can easily install it in your
cluster.

1. Set up a postgres database server manually somehow and have the
   credentials ready. The user must be able to create databases and
   roles.
2. Create a secret with these credentials. (all values are base64
   encoded, as usual). See `examples/dev-postgres-secret.yaml` for
   an example kubernetes resource definition. The **metadata -> name**
   will be the identifier with which you can later assign some databases
   onto that dbms server.
3. Enter the directory `helm/simple-database-provisioner` and execute

     helm -n sdp sync --name "simple-database-provisioner" .


Now watch the logs and create/delete some resources (e.g. from the `examples` folder, to verify functionality and to get used to it.

== Configuration

=== Application Config File

**config.yaml**
```yaml

dbmsServers:
  dev-postgres:
    secret: dev-postgres-secret

persistence:
  type: file
  location: ./sdp.db.yaml
```

=== Database Format (DRAFT)

The database format currently is only a rough draft and might
change during development according to the needs (e.g. list instead
of map, etc.).


```yaml

namespaces:
  master:
    instances:
      mynamespace-myservice-database:
        dbmsServer: dev-postgres
        databaseName: mynamespace-myservice
    bindings:
      mynamespace-myservice-binding:
        instanceName: mynamespace-myservice-database
        secretName: mynamespace-myservice-database-secret

```

=== DBMS Secret

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
type: Opaque
metadata:
  name: dbms-dev-postgres-secret
data:
  database: cG9zdGdyZXM=
  host: cG9zdGdyZXMtcG9zdGdyZXNxbA==
  password: WkthNWE4Y0w0Yg==
  port: NTQzMg==
  ssl: ZmFsc2U=
  user: cG9zdGdyZXM=
```

== Custom Resource Definitions

==== CDR: SimpleDatabaseInstance

```yaml
apiVersion: apiextensions.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: CustomResourceDefinition
metadata:
  name: simpledatabaseinstances.simpledatabaseprovisioner.k8s.ecodia.de
spec:
  group: simpledatabaseprovisioner.k8s.ecodia.de
  version: v1alpha1
  scope: Namespaced
  conditions:
  stored_versions: []
  names:
    plural: simpledatabaseinstances
    singular: simpledatabaseinstance
    kind: SimpleDatabaseInstance
    shortNames:
     - sdi
```

**Example**

```yaml
apiVersion: simpledatabaseprovisioner.k8s.ecodia.de/v1alpha1
kind: SimpleDatabaseInstance
metadata:
  name: sample-application-database
spec:
  dbmsServer: dbms-dev-postgres
  databaseName: sample-application-database
```

==== CDR: SimpleDatabaseBinding

```yaml
apiVersion: apiextensions.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: CustomResourceDefinition
metadata:
  name: simpledatabasebindings.simpledatabaseprovisioner.k8s.ecodia.de
spec:
  group: simpledatabaseprovisioner.k8s.ecodia.de
  version: v1alpha1
  scope: Namespaced
  names:
    plural: simpledatabasebindings
    singular: simpledatabasebinding
    kind: SimpleDatabaseBinding
    shortNames:
     - sdb
```

**Example**

```yaml
apiVersion: simpledatabaseprovisioner.k8s.ecodia.de/v1alpha1
kind: SimpleDatabaseBinding
metadata:
  name: sample-application-binding
spec:
  instanceName: sample-application-database
  secretName: sample-application-database-secret
```

== Development

This controller is based on the kubernetes samplecontroller:

https://github.com/kubernetes/sample-controller


=== Hands on

Let's jump right into some hands on commands

==== Run the controller

* The controller automatically detects if it is run inside a
  cluster or can connect to a cluster via the kubernetes api

* start minikube

* run controller.py , then load the example resources and watch
  how events are read

   kubectl apply -f examples/sdi-example.yaml
   kubectl apply -f examples/sdb-example.yaml

==== Delete databases and bindings

For testing purposes it might be necessary to remove the instances and bindings:

   kubectl delete sdi/sample-application-database
   kubectl delete sdb/sample-application-binding


==== Delete Custom Resource Definitions

For testing purposes it might be necessary to remove the custom resource definitions:

    kubectl delete crd/simpledatabasebindings.simpledatabaseprovisioner.k8s.ecodia.de
    kubectl delete crd/simpledatabaseinstances.simpledatabaseprovisioner.k8s.ecodia.de

=== Run tests

To run the tests you need minikube and a postgres database
with the correct user credentials:

    minikube start
    docker run --rm --name sdp-postgres-testdb -p 5432:5432 -e POSTGRES_PASSWORD=postgres -e POSTGRES_USER=postgres postgres

Then start the tests with:
    go test simple-database-provisioner...

=== Generate custom resource types

The simple-database-provisioner controller is based on https://github.com/kubernetes/sample-controller .

It makes use of the generators in k8s.io/code-generator to generate a typed client, informers, listers and deep-copy functions. You can do this yourself using the ./hack/update-codegen.sh script.

Commit message:

- add preserving mode - switch db to bolt and storm - add tests

README.adoc, after:

= Kubernetes Simple Database Provisioner
:toc:

[link=http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0.txt]
image::.images/license-apache.svg[License: Apache License 2.0]

image::.images/simple-database-provisioner.svg[alt=Simple Database Provisioner,width=200]



The simple database provisioner allows to create and remove databases and user credentials (secretes) via
kubernetes ressources on an existing DBMS server.

It was created as a simpler and more resilient alternative to setting up databases with OSBA.

== Status

**CURRENT STATUS: ALPHA**

Not intended for production use yet. Tests, refactoring
and updating the documentation are missing.


== Concept

* DBMS servers have to be created by some other tool (e.g. manually, or terraform)
* DBMS servers are identified in the config via a unique name and a secret with
  the connection information
* DBMS management is (currently) static and requires a pod restart
* Database Instance and Binding management is dynamic via two Custom Resource Definitions

== Installation

There is a helm chart provided so you can easily install it in your
cluster.

1. Set up a postgres database server manually somehow and have the
   credentials ready. The user must be able to create databases and
   roles.
2. Create a secret with these credentials. (all values are base64
   encoded, as usual). See `examples/dev-postgres-secret.yaml` for
   an example kubernetes resource definition. The **metadata -> name**
   will be the identifier with which you can later assign some databases
   onto that dbms server.
3. Enter the directory `helm/simple-database-provisioner` and execute

     helm -n sdp sync --name "simple-database-provisioner" .


Now watch the logs and create/delete some resources (e.g. from the `examples` folder, to verify functionality and to get used to it.

== Configuration

=== Application Config File

**config.yaml**
```yaml

provisioningMode: preserving

dbmsServers:
  dev-postgres:
    secret: dev-postgres-secret
```

==== Operation modes

The simple database provisioner supports different operation modes for different
usecases. The difference between the modes is their destructiveness. While in
dev environments it might be desireable to actively enforce the state described
in the kubernetes resources and clean up the databases on removal on production one
might want to ensure, that data can only be deleted manually and not by accident.

* **managing**:
   ** when the resources are removed, also the databases and secrets are removed

* **preserving** :
   ** databases and secrets are never deleted
   ** databases and secrets are never modified

=== Database Format (DRAFT)

The database format currently is only a rough draft and might
change during development according to the needs (e.g. list instead
of map, etc.).


```yaml

namespaces:
  master:
    instances:
      mynamespace-myservice-database:
        dbmsServer: dev-postgres
        databaseName: mynamespace-myservice
    bindings:
      mynamespace-myservice-binding:
        instanceName: mynamespace-myservice-database
        secretName: mynamespace-myservice-database-secret

```

=== DBMS Secret

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
type: Opaque
metadata:
  name: dbms-dev-postgres-secret
data:
  database: cG9zdGdyZXM=
  host: cG9zdGdyZXMtcG9zdGdyZXNxbA==
  password: WkthNWE4Y0w0Yg==
  port: NTQzMg==
  ssl: ZmFsc2U=
  user: cG9zdGdyZXM=
```

== Custom Resource Definitions

==== CDR: SimpleDatabaseInstance

```yaml
apiVersion: apiextensions.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: CustomResourceDefinition
metadata:
  name: simpledatabaseinstances.simpledatabaseprovisioner.k8s.ecodia.de
spec:
  group: simpledatabaseprovisioner.k8s.ecodia.de
  version: v1alpha1
  scope: Namespaced
  conditions:
  stored_versions: []
  names:
    plural: simpledatabaseinstances
    singular: simpledatabaseinstance
    kind: SimpleDatabaseInstance
    shortNames:
     - sdi
```

**Example**

```yaml
apiVersion: simpledatabaseprovisioner.k8s.ecodia.de/v1alpha1
kind: SimpleDatabaseInstance
metadata:
  name: sample-application-database
spec:
  dbmsServer: dbms-dev-postgres
  databaseName: sample-application-database
```

==== CDR: SimpleDatabaseBinding

```yaml
apiVersion: apiextensions.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: CustomResourceDefinition
metadata:
  name: simpledatabasebindings.simpledatabaseprovisioner.k8s.ecodia.de
spec:
  group: simpledatabaseprovisioner.k8s.ecodia.de
  version: v1alpha1
  scope: Namespaced
  names:
    plural: simpledatabasebindings
    singular: simpledatabasebinding
    kind: SimpleDatabaseBinding
    shortNames:
     - sdb
```

**Example**

```yaml
apiVersion: simpledatabaseprovisioner.k8s.ecodia.de/v1alpha1
kind: SimpleDatabaseBinding
metadata:
  name: sample-application-binding
spec:
  instanceName: sample-application-database
  secretName: sample-application-database-secret
```

== Development

This controller is based on the kubernetes samplecontroller:

https://github.com/kubernetes/sample-controller


=== Hands on

Let's jump right into some hands on commands

==== Run the controller

* The controller automatically detects if it is run inside a
  cluster or can connect to a cluster via the kubernetes api

* start minikube

* run controller.py , then load the example resources and watch
  how events are read

   kubectl apply -f examples/sdi-example.yaml
   kubectl apply -f examples/sdb-example.yaml

==== Delete databases and bindings

For testing purposes it might be necessary to remove the instances and bindings:

   kubectl delete sdi/sample-application-database
   kubectl delete sdb/sample-application-binding


==== Delete Custom Resource Definitions

For testing purposes it might be necessary to remove the custom resource definitions:

    kubectl delete crd/simpledatabasebindings.simpledatabaseprovisioner.k8s.ecodia.de
    kubectl delete crd/simpledatabaseinstances.simpledatabaseprovisioner.k8s.ecodia.de

=== Run tests

To run the tests you need minikube and a postgres database
with the correct user credentials:

    minikube start
    docker run --rm --name sdp-postgres-testdb -p 5432:5432 -e POSTGRES_PASSWORD=postgres -e POSTGRES_USER=postgres postgres

Then start the tests with:
    go test simple-database-provisioner...

=== Generate custom resource types

The simple-database-provisioner controller is based on https://github.com/kubernetes/sample-controller .

It makes use of the generators in k8s.io/code-generator to generate a typed client, informers, listers and deep-copy functions. You can do this yourself using the ./hack/update-codegen.sh script.
